server codegen documentation (#6265)
microsoft/typespec: docs/emitters/code-generation/server/server-code-generation.md

> # Generating server stubs with TypeSpec: a user guide

Author: done

TypeSpec plays a vital role in your project. By providing a well-defined blueprint and a solid foundation for your API design, TypeSpec helps make the development process more efficient, consistent, and structured.

**Key benefits:**

*   **Accelerated development:** Jumpstart your server implementation with automatically generated models and controllers.
*   **API consistency:** Ensure your server implementation adheres precisely to your API specification.
*   **Reduced manual effort:** Eliminate repetitive coding tasks, freeing you to focus on business logic.
*   **Improved maintainability:** Easily update your server as your API evolves by regenerating the stubs from the updated TypeSpec definition.

## Prerequisites

> Before you begin, make sure you have the following installed:

Reviewer: with the introduction of the standalone cli feel like it might be better of to redirect the initial setup to the install doc

Author: done.

*   **Node.js:** (version 20.x or later). Download from [https://nodejs.org/](https://nodejs.org/)

> *   **npm:** (version 6.x or later). Typically included with Node.js.

Reviewer: we say 7+ in the install docs

> *   **TypeSpec compiler:** Install the latest `@next` version globally using:

Reviewer: why next?

Author: Resolved by referring users to existing install guide.

```bash
npm install -D @typespec/openapi3 @typespec/http-client-csharp @typespec/http-client-js @typespec/http-server-csharp @typespec/http-server-js
```

## Using the cli to generate server stubs

1.  **Create a TypeSpec project:** If you don't already have one, create a new TypeSpec project using `tsp init`.

    ```bash
    mkdir my-api
    cd my-api
    tsp init
    ```

    During `tsp init`, you will be prompted to select different emitters, including server and client. If you have the necessary dependencies installed, TypeSpec can automatically populate your `tspconfig.yaml` file.

2.  **Define your api:** Write your API specification in a `.tsp` file (e.g., `main.tsp`). This is where you define your models, operations, and routes.

3.  **Compile your TypeSpec:** Use the `tsp compile` command to generate server stubs and other artifacts based on your specification.

    ```bash
    tsp compile .
    ```

    The compiler will output the generated server stubs to the directories specified in your `tspconfig.yaml` file (e.g., `servers/aspnet/generated` for C#).

4.  **Project structure:** After compiling, you will typically see the following structure:

>     ```text

Reviewer: See startlight filetree component to have a better presentation here https://starlight.astro.build/components/file-tree/, we use it in a few other places in the codebase too

Reviewer: same for all the other dir examples

Author: done

```text
servers/
┣ aspnet/
┃ ┗ generated/
┃   ┣ controllers/               # Contains the base controller classes
┃ ┃ ┃ ┣ CommentOpsOperationsControllerBase.cs  # Base class for comment-related API operations
┃ ┃ ┃ ┣ CommentsOperationsControllerBase.cs   # Base class for general comment operations
┃ ┃ ┃ ┣ ... (other controller base classes)
┃   ┣ lib/                     # Utility functions
┃ ┃ ┃ ┣ ArrayConstraintAttribute.cs    # Custom attributes for enforcing array constraints
┃ ┃ ┃ ┣ Base64UrlConverter.cs        # Utility for Base64 URL encoding
┃ ┃ ┃ ┣ ... (other utility files)
┃   ┣ models/                  # Defines the data models (DTOs) used by the API
┃ ┃ ┃ ┣ Attachment.cs              # Data model representing an attachment
┃ ┃ ┃ ┣ Collaborator.cs            # Data model representing a collaborator
┃ ┃ ┃ ┣ ... (other model files)
┃   ┗ operations/              # Defines service interface
┃ ┃ ┃ ┣ ICommentOpsOperations.cs  # Service interface for comment-related operations
┃ ┃ ┃ ┣ ICommentsOperations.cs   # Service interface for general comment operations
┃ ┃ ┃ ┣ ... (other operation interface files)
```

> *   **`Controllers`**: These folders contain *base classes* for your API controllers (e.g., `CommentOpsOperationsControllerBase.cs`, `TodoItemsOperationsControllerBase.cs`). These base classes define the API endpoints and handle basic request processing. **You will need to create concrete controller classes that inherit from these base classes and implement your business logic.**

Reviewer 2: This is out of date - there are no more base controllers

Author: revised

> *   **`lib`**: This directory contains utility classes such as custom attributes used for server side validation to ensure input data adhere to the spec.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   **`lib`**: This directory contains helper classes used in generated code, such as custom attributes used for server-side validation to ensure input data adhere to the spec.
```

*   **`Models`**: These files define the data models (also known as Data Transfer Objects or DTOs) used in your API (e.g., `TodoItem.cs`, `Project.cs`). These classes represent the structure of the data being exchanged between the client and the server.

> *   **`Operations`**: These files defines the service interface used for API operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   **`Operations`**: These files defines the service interface used for API operations. You will implement these interfaces to execute the business logic for each operation.
```

    [Placeholder: Detailed instructions on setting up a Node.js/Express project, integrating the generated code, and running the server will be added here.]

    1.  **Create a basic express app:** Use the Express generator to create a new project:

        ```bash
        npm install -g express-generator
        express my-express-app
        cd my-express-app
        npm install
        ```

    2.  **Install additional dependencies:** You may need additional dependencies depending on your API requirements (e.g., `body-parser` for parsing request bodies).

        ```bash
        npm install body-parser --save
        ```

    3.  **Integrate generated code:** Copy the contents of the `servers/node/tsp-output/@typespec/http-server-javascript` directory into your Express project. You will likely need to adapt the generated code to fit the Express routing and middleware structure.

    4.  **Configure routes:** Define your API routes in your Express app, mapping them to the generated controller functions.

    5.  **Run the server:** Start the Express server:

        ```bash
        npm start
        ```

## Cli: running the project and adding necessary code:

> Now that you have the base controller, models and service interface generated, the next step is to implement the code with a service scaffolding and business logic for a runnable server. Please follow the instruction below:

Reviewer 2: This has changed quite a bit

Author: @markcowl where/how can I get the latest info on how it works?

Author: revised

1.  **ASP.NET webapi server (C#):**

    1.  Navigate to the server directory:

        ```bash
        cd servers/aspnet
        ```

    2.  Run the server:

        ```bash
        dotnet run
        ```

    3.  Open your browser and navigate to `http://localhost:[PORT#]/swagger/index.html` (replace `[PORT#]` with the actual port number shown in the console output). You should see the Swagger UI, allowing you to test your API endpoints.

## Using the vscode extension

The TypeSpec Extension for VSCode offers a convenient way to generate server stubs directly from your IDE.

1.  **Install the extension:** Search for "TypeSpec" in the VSCode Extensions Marketplace and install the official TypeSpec extension.

2.  **Create a TypeSpec project:**
    *   Click “Create TypeSpec Project” in the EXPLORE sidebar.
        *   `[Placeholder: Screenshot showing "Create TypeSpec Project" in the VSCode Explorer sidebar]`
    *   Select a project root folder.
    *   Provide the required inputs via Quick Picks, similar to using `tsp init` on the command line.

> 

Reviewer 3: May use this gif - ![vscode_project_scaffolding.gif](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/microsoft/typespec/main/website/src/content/docs/docs/images/vscode_project_scaffolding.gif)

Author: 👍

3.  **Define your api:** Write your API specification in a `.tsp` file.

> 

Reviewer 3: May mention “code faster with IntelliSense and Auto-completion support”. ![vscode.gif](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/microsoft/typespec/main/website/src/content/docs/docs/images/vscode.gif)

4.  **Generate the server stub:**

>     *   Right-click on a `.tsp` file to open the context menu.

Reviewer 3: Better to introduce TypeSpec command here.  Launch TypeSpec command with ">TypeSpec: Emit from TypeSpec" from Command Palette.  

https://github.com/microsoft/typespec/pull/6342 the gif is here. when it is merged. it can be used with ![vscode.gif](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/microsoft/typespec/main/website/src/content/docs/docs/images/vscode_tsp_to_server_stubs_generation.gif)

    *   Select “Generate from TypeSpec”.
        *   `[Placeholder: Screenshot showing the "Generate from TypeSpec" option in the context menu]`
    *   Select "Server Stub" from the Emitter Types.
        *   `[Placeholder: Screenshot showing the "Emitter Types" Quick Pick with "Server Stub" selected]`
    *   Choose the desired target language (e.g., ".NET – Generate .Net server stub by @typespec/http-server-csharp").
        *   `[Placeholder: Screenshot showing the language selection Quick Pick]`
    *   TypeSpec compiler will run in the background, generating a new directory under "servers\<language>".

        *   `[Placeholder: Screenshot showing the generated server directory structure in VSCode]`

> 

Reviewer 3: May use this gif ![vscode_tsp_to_openapi3_generation.gif](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/microsoft/typespec/main/website/src/content/docs/docs/images/vscode_tsp_to_openapi3_generation.gif)
